Yeah, yeah, you're gonna feast on this one. Conceptuality is something other than itself.
There's been a change in the image of thought. That's what it is, that's what it is, that's what.
It is the internal structure of, but as soon as an utterance slips from the mouth, it's divorced
from the subject. Now it's serious, no more joking around, no more kidding, no more Pokémon talk.
How's, uh, how's your love life going, John?
Totally seamless segue there, yeah.
How do we segue this into Nietzsche on women? All right, well, you, last time, we were trying because
you guys were basically saying how there's more nuanced takes here on women than it at least
appears on the surface, and I was kind of given the more like, I, I was struggling to find the areas
where I could be generous to his readings. I'm to the point now where I just think like this is one
of the more interesting reads on the question of women, the question of the concept, the idea of women
that I've, I've read in a bit, and it's like, we'll bracket, like we're not going to deal with the
question of Nietzsche on women. I think we're just going to deal with the question of Book Two of the
Gay Science on women, and then because yeah, what I've, you know, for all of the talk of Nietzsche not
being a systemic thinker and like, you know, aphoristic on one, like there is so much tight
coordination between these aphorisms, there really, there really is, I agree with that, yeah, I, I mean
you know, everywhere's like, okay, you know, take this one back to 59, all right, this one go back to 57
50, like jump this one up to like whatever, there's just so much tight coordination, and then so like
when you get to the some of the women's stuff, and and some of it that might feel a little bit on the
surface a little bit jarring, you're like, well, no, you plug that back in to this other aphorism and it
completely changes the sense of this, and you know, so I'm to the point where this is, I mean it is very
much so, I mean if I if I didn't try to think this up before, but if I tried to summarize it's like
the concept of women, like the metaphysics of woman as a product of man, is fucking tyrannical
for people who inhabit the concept of, of woman, like people who would normally call it women, it is
it is a fascistic beast, and uh, it sucks for women and it differently sucks for men, um, but it's like, you know,
I mean I think this is, um, aphorism, it's where the sage says 68, where the sage the wise men train the men
yeah, yeah, yeah, it's like this is, you know, this is women are, uh, doubly innocent, you know, they like
here, I mean here it is, um, you know, this is aphorism 68, it's called "Will and Willingness."
Someone took a youth to a wise man and said, "Look, he is being corrupted by women." The wise man shook his
head and smiled. "It is men who corrupt women," he exclaimed, "and the failings of women should be atoned
for and set right in men, for man makes himself the image of women and woman shapes herself according in
this image. "You are too gentle towards women," said one of the company. "You do not know them." The wise men
replied, "The way of men is will, the way of women is willingness. That is the law of the sexes, truly a
hard law for women. All human beings are innocent of their existence, women however are doubly innocent. Who
could have oil and mercy enough for them? Forget oil! Forget gentleness!" shouted someone from the crowd.
One has to raise women better. One has to raise men better," said the wise man, and beckoned the youth to
follow him, but the youth did not follow him. I mean, when you plug that into the earlier stuff, especially
the stuff that we were talking about in the last episode on on the inventive power of rhetoric and the
production of of reality, and you realize that anytime he says, at least in these aphorisms, anytime he says
woman, or most of the time he says woman, he's talking about the production of the reality or the idea of
what of what we call women, and like and then it taking on its own, its own weight, its own inertia, its own
force catching like to slip to slightly more Deleuzian language, it's sort of like it's coordination with
bodies, it's taking up of bodies, and and um, becoming alongside them, with them, and in opposition to them
whatever, um, but I you know, I take this as a critical intervention into the rhetorical production of the
concept of women. I mean, I don't know if that's how John it struck you this time around. That's, I mean, I I I would
start thinking of it this way, like um, this is a thorny problem and it's it's one that I I I really
deeply want to grapple with because I actually feel like for political reasons, um, obvious political
reasons, like Nietzsche's relation Nietzsche's figuring of woman is like an important question
not just because of Nietzsche or because of women or because of Nietzsche on women but because this is a
very very impossible thing to talk about, you know, and it's it's just so sticky and so messy and so
Difficult and so complicated and so so hard to to even try to do it without at every single step
saying something stupid you know or saying something that's perceived as stupid either any way you go
like it's it's so hard to do um dare not does it right dare not does it in that's the spurs book is
like you know um i i i thought you know my question was going to be style but instead it's going to be
woman and it's woman and Nietzsche and he takes he takes the tack i mean he uses that the um it starts off
that epigraph 60 which is where it starts in Gay Science is what he starts with which is the uh you know
the um the boat being seen at a distance and that the the the power of woman is a power that functions
at a distance and so the cautionary tale is for men for men that one must keep a distance from distance
so one must out distance distance so he you can see how he will get from there to a distance that's not
simply the distance between two things right because that there is no thing there to have distance from
and that's where he'll go further towards the the the beginning of Beyond Good and Evil like supposing
truth for a woman and that that passage where it's like there is no and and there is a section in here
there is no essence of woman right that they're uh so on number 64 i'm afraid that old women are more
skeptical in their most secret heart of hearts than any man they consider the superficiality of existence
its essence and all virtue and profundity to them is a veil over this truth a welcome veil over a
pedendum in other words a matter of decency and shame and no more than that and there's another passage
where women aren't deep they aren't even shallow right like so yeah there really are these places where
it's like look here's what woman offers or the feminine operation offers and the feminine operation offers a
sense of truth irrelevance yes right it's it's irrelevance like you know or it's or it's simulacral
you know foundationally simulacral quality now what that would mean of course is that that's not the truth
of woman right right so it's easy to say i mean to get the reading where it's like oh okay so now the
truth of women is their superficiality and it's like no no no no no like the the the the operate the
feminine operate that's where to me i like the terminology of the feminine operation as opposed to
to women right like and and look there's just so many places when he goes after
um women it's oftentimes in terms of feminism right i mean like really explicitly in terms of women's rights
and and it's it's exactly around the conception the metaphysics of self yeah right like where it's like
this is like women in in terms of the feminine operation this is where the possibility exists this is where
you know something else becomes like giving birth becomes possible right and and to to turn it towards
the metaphysics of uh presence identity uh subjectivity is like such a tragedy right like such a a
misfortune well turning the um i mean the critiques of feminism in other places are so closely wrapped up with
this gent more general critique of liberalism and the primacy of the individual so it's like yes
the critiques of feminism and women in that context it's just like and here's an instance of it here's
an instance of the problem of liberalism not it's not primarily an issue with feminism but i i really
liked that that 60 that aphorism 64 with the old woman one in a couple of these i mean you know i just
said a few minutes ago it's like anytime you say women then you have to think about as you called it
the feminine operation or the idea the concept of women yeah yeah except for a few of them blur those
lines you have to still keep that sense but there but then there's also a lived experience as well as
like you know the body that has had the feminine operation done onto it for a long time hence the old
woman and i was trying to think through well first off i think it's worthwhile to point out
um you know old women are more skeptical than men they believe the superficiality of existence to be
its essence well on the surface of things that's that sounds like a diss that sounds like well you lack
depth you lack perception right right and then you know it shouldn't be it's not that hard to explain
well no actually that's a that's a virtue and but to talk about the system like the systemic nature of this
of this book that goes right back to aphorism 57 and 58 on the question of the real and you know like
you know the 58 is the only as creators and the power of the name the power of the surface to
be productive right so you know here he's basically equating here the old woman as the the critique
the critic through creation but it's like why why an old woman um and i think here this is
where it's not just the the the feminine operation but here it is in some ways the um uh from a certain
perspective of a habitualizing of like having the feminine operation run for a very long time and a
certain kind of like that produces a perspective that's unavailable for men or young women or whatever
like, you know, you can, you know, you can reason your way to that superficiality in a few different ways, but
when one's when one becomes the ship at the distance for men for so for long enough, like, yeah, you can see
it from a different perspective, you get, you have a clarity on it that you wouldn't otherwise have, well
there's a way, I mean, you know, to add on to exactly what you're saying, there's a way in which our effort
to get to what's interesting about women is a typically masculine way of getting to it, like
you know, in order to make this interesting we make these series uh of moves that from the feminine
operations perspective are just unnecessary, yeah, yeah, we have to make it in order to do it, we have to
make a concept out of it, and yet the critique is that we make a concept out of women, make a concept
out of it, and then in order to get a handle on it, we make a concept out of them making the concept of
women, that, well, no, but that's right because that's where my effort to distinguish the feminine
operation from women fails, right? It fails, and it has to, it has to fail, and it's still an effort; it's
still like, okay, you see what i'm trying to do here, i'm not, you know, we're not trying to say the truth
of women is now something, and and look, i mean, this is like a rigore, uh, this is uh, a line that others in
that tradition certainly took, right, like the right that the the truth of woman is that there is no
truth, right, that that's that's that's the the the positive, the positive quality, so it's not the case that
Nietzsche and feminism are antithetical, right, um, at all, or at least hasn't historically been the case
but it's a hard one, right, like it's a hard one to manage because, and Derrida is good on this, so Derrida
does like all the moves that we just sort of went through, like Derrida goes through those moves in a
little bit more extensive detail but not a lot more extensive detail, and then he's like, how does
one reconcile the statements that we've just come up with with all the like just clearly misogynistic
things that Nietzsche says where it where it doesn't seem interesting, and it doesn't seem like there's a
championing of a kind of primordial superficiality and whatnot, and his answer is like, i don't fucking know
really, his answer is just like, and this is kind of a cop-out answer, at least to me this is a cop-out
answer, but his answer is sort of like there are many different women in Nietzsche, right? women is not
a unified concept, and so when and and he's right about that, right, like i mean that's certainly but
there is a coordination of them, and trying to figure out the coordination might and that's the thing to
me is like, because because that's the the dare not move sort of just kind of throws up its hands it's
like, well, you know, some of the some of it's shitty and misogynistic and some of it's really cool and
interesting
from the time i started grad school i've really really dreamt of having the courage
um to write about this uh to write about this topic because i really feel like it's a limit point
for for me as a thinker and as a man, you know, to write like it's it's just impossible to do it well
and that's and i'm not even kidding, like i have like there's this one particular passage where it says
he says women aren't capable of of friendship because of
love women are not capable of friendship and um but and right afterwards he says but what man is
capable of of friendship either, but i've always, you know, i've wanted to well here it's also the
philosopher who's not capable of friendship, right, right? I mean, and the philosophy I mean the
definition, right, is the friend of the wizard, you know, um, and i've i've wanted to write about that in
terms of the friendship and you know philosophy, like that has been i and i'm not even joking, like
my whole career i've dreamed that at some point i will have the courage and the care
to to try to write about that i don't know that i didn't ever even try to publish that
because it just seems like you're just asking for a world of shit, right? yeah, um, but sometimes
sometimes maybe that's important, maybe it's worth asking for well shit i i think it's just
that's why i really wanted to talk about the this this you know i really want to not i'm glad we did
what we were what we were doing last time was skipping it, yeah, which is which is, you know, a totally
natural re i mean we were all doing it, right? like it's just a natural reaction because it's like what
the fuck do you do with this because it's it's hard to think how how to do it and at least to me, like
Derrida is the guy who provides the roadmap for how to try, well, but it seems like you're it seems like
you're saying that there's a different intervention that you could take though because you say that Derrida
essentially in in the particularly misogynistic parts of Nietzsche he just throws up his hands
Do you think there's a different way of negotiating that with the more like that with the more
interesting parts i i think that i i'd like to see if it's possible i i don't know i mean again one of
the important thing for me is like i don't really care what the guy named Nietzsche thought about
women like i just don't care about that that's irrelevant to me but i do care about are there
things that we can do with the writings by this guy named Nietzsche on this concept that can allow
us to think uh differently right like and it's kind of like it's just i just see it as a as a great
challenge it'd be like uh um it'd be like here here's a challenge for for you boo boo write about Hegel as
having no interest in the negative right yeah yeah you know what i mean where it's it's like
and there are places i'm sure in Hegel where you could be like well this seems like it's not simply
a negation of negation as a way about you know there are places and then you see like could you fold
that what would it do to fold that back into other things and then because to me the larger question
ends up being truthfully nothing is anything necessarily and and but there are certain things
that are hard for the to not see them as the things that they are right and and that's and that's
where this particular one for me for for my whole intellectual life has been like i'd like someday to be to have the
the courage and the care uh to to to do this i mean i i hope that i do i really do focusing on
this today definitely shifted my ability to care about it because yeah what we did for the last
episode is i read this whole thing and some of the stuff on women i found very interesting and
coordinated with the other stuff that we were reading and i you know it's like i was like
prepared to talk about that and other but i knew if i did yeah then all the other stuff was going
to come in i'm like i'm just ignoring that because i don't know what to do with it that's right right
now but now focusing on it even some of the ones that i just sort of skipped over last time and even
like you know i don't think in at least in book two of The Gay Science there's any like overtly
misogynist stuff in here um but like some of them definitely still yeah this stuff isn't as bad as like
when you go to women carry bring bring a whip yeah we got to turn to that because like it's a women
that says it's a woman it's an old woman that says that in Zarathustra like but like there's it's
just i don't even know how to approach that one like it does like it sounds very gross on the surface
but then just like but i also know that there's like seven different things going here and i don't
know where any of these threads are attaching so it's another one i just throw up my hands on
but here like there are two of them here that that kind of threw me the first got like i had
question marks by them like what do you what do you do with this they just seem to be like Nietzsche was
having a bad day that day um but here so 74 and 75 they're very short so the first one is the
unsuccessful those poor women are always unsuccessful are always unsuccessful who in their presence of the
one they love become restless and insecure and talk too much for men are most surely seduced by a
certain secret and phlegmatic tenderness on the one hand it's just like it just seems like a typical
sort of diss of like a certain like chattiness of women yeah they talk too much they talk too much
right she's not a song that's like a hip-hop song from the 90s right yeah and then too much it never shuts up
but it made me think of 60 here as well and it was just like no this is
you know that well it made me think of 60 and uh 59 which i originally didn't mark 59 as a woman one
because it's like it just sort of mentions women as sort of like a well yeah a metaphor but it really
is yeah yeah it's an example for theology man are those two things connected um especially in terms
of a kind of metaphysical capitalism like i'm like the sort of consumer individuality but well i'll
pause that and come back to it because in 74 at least the way that i see it's like here this chatty woman
is being is is for the man who she's being unsuccessful with that's right the ship at a distance
it's like you are you are your naturalness whether we're going to think about that and you're sort of
like reproductive naturalness or the fact that you have a body underneath your skin or she farts
that she farts that she that she talks too much she doesn't fit like you know the like the ship got too
close to the person and be yeah the distance is like and like John now plug that in with you know on
female chastity in 71 where he's talking about the sort of the ridiculous um uh um catch 22 of being
a woman in relationship to sexuality upper class women aren't supposed to know anything about sex
until they marry the person they love and then now suddenly this thing that has been a huge source of
Like shame and dignity is what he calls a gruesome, gruesome lightning bolt throughout, uh, throwing her
into reality and knowledge. Um, it's like, uh, this, the the chatty woman here is is like living the
productive. This is this is only about the the woman living, living the feminized, the feminizing operation
the relation the relation to man, yeah, like this is man's violence asserting itself onto the the the
like the the feminine, like the feminine operation is the misogynist, uh, um, operation onto that body
you don't fit the paradigm of women. You talk too much, all right, it's the exact same thing i think with 75
you know, the third sex, man, a small man is a paradox but still a man, but small women seem to me when
compared to tall women to belong to another sex and this is all quoted by the way so this is by some
some old dancing master. A small woman is never beautiful said old Aristotle and like you know
the footnote here is like, i i don't think Aristotle actually says this. That's not the point, right? It's
like you know here the the the body that has been appropriated as women there's a glitch in it
right it can't quite fit the uh the ship at a distance and it's like now you're just a breach, you're a
third sex. You don't even fucking belong, right? Again, violent side product, well i mean like there's not
it's like the main product and the side products are all violent, of this i don't i just don't
understand the size thing. I get defensive with this one. Kara's super small, i'm like, well she's beautiful
what i don't understand, like, was that a thing and in Nietzsche's time that tall, i mean i guess tall
women are usually the models, you know, in magazines and shit. I mean i think it's also like what counts
as small. Maybe maybe she's talking about like a like a little person. I mean i don't know. Like yeah
really really small women. I assume that care is taller than three feet, right? Yeah, okay. A three-foot
woman is a different sex for Aristotle. They're they can't be beautiful. I mean again just the fact that
like you know whether it's Aristotle like you know again they have a physicality yes that doesn't fit
with the paradigm, the ideal paradigm of physicality of woman whose operation is supposed to be to
to present itself as having stillness and peacefulness at a distance. Yes, and and being
non-corporeal. Yes, like in other words it gives us the metaphysics, the promise of metaphysics
for fuck's sake. Yes, right? Like i mean that's that's a lot, right? Like i think so i don't think it has to
be midgets. Like i think it's any sort of version of unattractive and just to point out like the
footnote to continue, i i mean i love this is the in the Kauffman you have hollingtail i i assume but
in the Kauffman translation how it finishes is so great with this absurd aphorism
the pages on women reach their nadir and end the rest of book two deals with art. It's like oh
yeah they because they couldn't possibly be related. Like i know everything everything that we just
talked about. I know in terms of superficiality and art and what you were saying earlier, Nathaniel
about like these things are rigidly like systematized and it's like the fact that we go from woman and
superficiality it's like well we're done with that and now we're going to talk about art it's like no
i think we're not done with that. I know well i mean what Kauffman is so funny because he's so wants to
distance. He's like look yeah did you get crazy with women now i'm so happy that we're done it we can
get to the real stuff. Yeah, but 59 is called is the aphorism is we artists and then the very first line
is when we love a woman, right, right? And it's about nature culture like yeah right it's thoroughly
intertwined. Well and then the later obviously the later sections on art and rhetoric and stuff are
connected as well like i didn't i didn't think of this beforehand but he does this whole thing about
how the Greeks were obsessed with you know perfect oration talking or yeah good talking and that's
another that's just another it's uh you know it's analogous to to the example of the ideal of women
right like the chat we have this yeah we have this artificial like and even in current tv shows you'll
have like you'll have a character who's in a situation who's called upon to speak and it's
usually perfect they they find suddenly they're like rhetorically you know they're all stars right
and they give a speech whereas in real life this would never happen you'd be fumbling over your words
most of the time most people can't rise to the occasion and give this flawless oration right but we
like to see that what are you talking about? You've seen my class, you've been in my classes
i'm just saying like i was watching Breaking Bad. Personally insulting us. I i was i was watching
Breaking Bad and like they're in these high pressure situations and Jesse is able to under duress give
a super eloquent, you know fucking monologue, you know, and it just doesn't happen in real life
Jesse right Jesse Pinkman gives an eloquent monologue, right? And obviously that's that wouldn't
typically happen in real life, and I I felt like there's an I mean there's a clear connection to
like for some reason an audience wants that, like they want the the the artificiality, they don't want
real demonstration of the cogito, right? I mean, like, you talk about the there's the again the question of
metaphysics, is that like, look, there is the the configuration of the conscious as the thinking
subject and we need we need our hit to show that that's possible, that that happens, that can happen
and yeah, and having like mastery over over your experience, self-mastery and all that, right? But I but
it's not I felt like because I put in the sidebar like is this about platonic ideals because I didn't
think we were really even talking about that at any point in this text, but it did seem like
like the the woman at a distance is like are we trying to uphold some sort of platonic ideal of
womanhood that is then corrupted by bodily functions and shit like is that is that the the metaphor for
this type of for this type of setup here, a platonic ideal? Because I feel like it's something else
i i yeah i don't i don't think of it as a platonic idea. I mean, it's i see the connection, I see what
you're thinking. I I think of it more as that's that's the operation that men want women to serve, which is
to give us this sense that somewhere out there there is something good, right? Yeah, you know? And it's not
me, and and so i'm gonna force it on someone else, right? Right? And so it's a it's um it is it's an ideal in a
sense, but I think deeper than it being an ideal it is the prospect of metaphysics, it is the prospect
of truth, right? The activity of it out there somewhere, right? Like out there somewhere there is this thing
like so so it's a function, and it's not simply an idealized function, but it is also that, but it's a
function that that is generative for all of philosophy and frankly masculinity and so far as you know like
it's it's an engine, um, and it's a it's an engine in which their women are supposed to play a role
right? That they don't have bodies, they don't smell, they don't you know, right? Um, talk
they're all Daisy from um Dukes of Hazzard, no the Great, no the Great Gatsby, you know? She's like
ethereal, she smells of money, she's right? Yeah. She's not bodily at all, you know? That's the but like
i am i am obsessing with these first three aphorisms, 57, 58, and 59 because i i have i found such a a
profound um coordination between the three of these things and it's almost it seems to mirror the the
moves of theory. It's like the first one is a critique of the realists, right? That's right. Like
you dumbass positivists, the realists are just another version of the you know simulators, yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's like you dumbass realist, you think that there was something real, you're just doing something
it's just of a different way at a different wavelength as the people that you criticize. 58
it then he wrinkles it and it's like, you know, now the game isn't just the hermeneutics of
suspicion and pointing out that the realist doesn't happen, it's that reality is produced and names and
superficiality produce it, right? Right? And then we can just nine only as creators. I mean, I know we talked
about that a bunch last time, but that is such an important phrasing there because it's not
it's not the hegelian version of destruction first and then rise from the act, like then builds upon
that; it is creation is the means of destruction. Yes. So like calling things something else
yeah, I mean think of this in terms of setting up the woman. Yes, now get to 59
it's yet another layer because before and I think we kind of did this in the last one we romanticize
you know creation and destruction, right? The you know only as creators like you know there is
the sort of you know joyful affirmation we're gonna create this world around us, we're gonna
delight in this fantasy that we've produced, it's all apollonian now and his example here is woman
like here's something we created and it is fucked up, like we like this is incredibly violent and are you
cool is it right if i just read 59 and then i think it's incredibly important because it's just like
because i think it is exactly where this question of of um the idealizing metaphysis it is where
it is where the inventive creativity meets idealism and women and also it's where metaphysics and
capitalism or ownership come into play and this is like this is the perfect trifecta of these three things
so the so 59 is we artists when we love a woman we easily come to hate nature because of all of the
repressive a repulsive natural functions to which every woman is subject we prefer not to think about
it at all but when our soul for once brushes up against these matters it shrugs impatiently and
just said cast a contemptuous look at nature we feel insulted nature seems to intrude on our property and with the
The most profane hands at that, right? So this is the ship at a distance. I want to look at it. I want to
make it all soul. I want to make it all beautiful. And then when it shows that it's a body, it feels like
because it's my projection of this thing is my property that has been sort of defiled by the existence of
this thing by being property at all by yes, exactly. Or just, well, yes. In cases like, uh, this one, uh, in
cases like this one refuses to hear anything about physiology and uh decrees secretly to oneself, I will
hear nothing of the idea that the human being is anything other than soul and form. The human being
under the skin is an abomination and unthinkable to all lovers, a blasphemy against god and love and
now this is where he switches it to theology and now links gender to to theology and god to consumer like
to capitalism. Now the way uh lovers still feel about nature and naturalness is how every worshiper of
god and his holy omnipotence formerly felt, and everything that was said about nature by astronomers
geologists physiologists and doctors he saw an intrusion on his choicest property and thus an attack
and a shameless one at that. Even the law of nature sounded to him like a slander against god. He would
basically much rather have seen all of the mechanics traced back to moral acts of will and choice, but
since no one could do him that service he concealed nature and mechanics from himself as best he could
and lived in a dream. Oh, these people of former times knew how to dream and didn't even fall asleep first
and we men of today also still know it all too well despite our good will towards waking and the day
we only need to love to hate to desire simply to feel at once the spirit and power of the dreams come
over it comes over us and we climb with open eyes impervious to all danger up the most dangerous paths
onto the roofs and towers of fantasy and without any vertigo as though born to climb, we sleepwalkers of the
day, we artists, we who conceal naturalness, we are moon and godstruck, we untiring wanderers, silent as death
on heights that we do not see as heights but as our planes as our safety. Like he's talking about the
metaphysical operation here, and it's the exact same medical physical operation of making a reality
making the world that is palatable for us, and it's both this. The this is both the artistic impulse, the
highest thing of the human, and is also the most violent, dangerous, damaging thing. And he uses the
the figure of woman to show this. Yeah, I mean the very next 10 aphorisms. Yeah, the very next aphorism is
the action at a distance of yeah of women. So it's yeah, yeah. Here's the metaphor, here's a metaphysical
operation, our artistic metaphysical operation because i'm talking about artistry of the highest order
and i'm going to show how it plays out with the the metaphysical production of women or the the feminine
and then we're going to talk and then we're going to talk for the next 10 pages about art which is
unrelated
are and germany is an idea. Germany is an argument. Is that that's in this section right? Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Woman is an argument. Germany is an argument.
Yeah, I mean I I think that there's I think there's good reason for for making those links
right? Like, I mean I don't think that Derrida is making that up, right? Like I I really don't like
it's not uh it's not this ex nihilo like how did you get this um but it it is a labor, right? It is a
labor. It's not it's not simply it's it's not given um and and it requires an operation of a particular
interpretive kind to do and it's perfectly justifiable for somebody to be like
you know you're just trying to make your heroes seem like he's not a sexist when
when he's really a sexist and you know yeah he may well have really been a sexist uh again for me
I mean also I just I just don't care about that question. Well, also who wasn't at that time? I mean
i'm sorry but every well there's that there's a historical era I mean that's one of that's one of the
ways not that one of the ways right but but that is one of the ways but I think that's the weaker way
like that's one of the ways of dealing with the sexism and Niches to say this is the 19th century
people had you know uh views of women that we wouldn't necessarily hold today and that's not wrong
wrong because we're so enlightened right so we've really figured it out yeah right um I think the
stronger and harder argument to make is what Derrida is making is is is to say like he wasn't simply
sexist right this that this is it's it's a messier question than that in terms of thinking and you know
the attempt to distinguish something like what i'm calling the feminine operation from woman or from
femininity or something like that and Derrida does the same kind of thing i'm not that's not my like
i'm taking it out from him um well clearly each is more complex than just a routine misogynist
But it seems like there is something about, like, with Hegel, I'd like an analog here would be he was a
practicing faithful Lutheran and yet the text writes itself out of that god function constantly now
whether that's intentional or not it's that's kind of an impossible and stupid question. It gives it
it gives an engine to a god function, right? Well, right, but the tech like Hegel as a self probably
didn't, um, probably didn't, uh, even attempt to rationalize the complexity of the text against his own
faith and yet the the text itself is so complicated to the point where it's like you don't find a a
simple god function in The Phenomenology of Spirit that you could subscribe to that you could advertise
in a church and so it's like maybe Nietzsche is writing something, you know, that kind of lends itself
to this idea of deconstructing metaphysics or an outline of performativity and yet he still could have
been in some sense a routine misogynist. Well, you know, I, I think that for me the point would be not
Nietzsche is exceptional and not a routine misogynist, but there's no such thing as routine misogyny
right? Like that routine misogyny or or another way of saying that is well yeah misogyny is already
multiple and implicated in, you know, um, questions of metaphysics with which it would seem to have very
little traffic. Um, right? But he was willing, he was willing to write through the problem of women in a
way that most people I'm guessing in his era were not, you know, like like like Schopenhauer, right? Who
just I've never read that but apparently it's super sexist, you know, his and you do? Yeah, right? But you do have
those places but it always it just gives me pause because I'm like and it is the case where you you
know, I mean I the aphorism like women aren't deep they are not even shallow, right? Like that is the
aphorism that's not making it up. So for him to have written that he had to have been thinking something
right? Like it seems it's so there are axes in here where you're like
he's doing something when he says that, when he says they're not even shallow
he's doing something with depth, right? Like in other words they're not part of the whole
matrix of of surfaces and depths so they're not surfaces in the usual way of thinking of surfaces
that's where thinking of the simulacrum enters which is like simulacrum is not simply
secondary in relationship to a real, right? Well it's also like look the insult is usually to say
you are shallow as opposed to being that's right well yeah like you are so far past shallow that
you've actually reached something else entirely like you're not even on the this yeah the matrix is
what is my question then yeah my question then is why I mean it seems like you could use any example
or any binary or any object to and he does elsewhere to come up with the same configuration of of
concepts so why why is the concept or the the paradigm or whatever of women why is that important to this
text or to Nietzsche in general if you can if you can figure the same conceptual coordinates with any
other any other it's it's a good question because like uh you know one of the one of the issues in
the back of my head like I said I've been thinking about this forever of wanting to do this kind of
thing it's like when I read the stuff that he says about Germans I'm just kind of like yeah who cares
like I don't give a fuck what he really thought about Germans in the 19th century he doesn't exercise
me in the same way and it's precisely because of the continued relevance right of the the discourse
that we're talking about here loosely as something like feminism that uh that I'm invested in
this problematic and maintaining it and and and trying to work with it and through it and and recognizing I
think also to me importantly recognizing that like I can't there isn't a right way like there's not
going to be a safe way to do it there's not a place where I will avoid saying or writing or
thinking something that is what was routine sexism, you know, that that it's like there's there's nowhere
outside of the uh of the sexist game with which to negotiate this that's that's why it draws me
because could you think these figures in other terms surfaces and depths but of course why do you
need woman for that you don't need woman for the question of surface and depth you can think them
on you know any number of other uh registers it's also I think I mean I think part of the point here is
that it's an historical uh function like surface and in depth I mean surfaces as the terrain of the
feminine is not something that Nietzsche made up right like it's uh you know it's it's in
play-doh right like the cosmetic thing you know like it's it's it's all over the history and that's
where you say something like you know when Derrida will make these kinds of claims of like the question
of woman is the question of metaphysics right? Like it's not like this is the political problem and
Then there's a philosophical problem over here: it's like the whole dynamic of surface and depth is built
in to gender relation. Yeah, yeah, you know, and and and it's inextricable from so, which is to say the
politics of gender relation are also inextricable from a fundamental metaphysical problem, a structure
of metaphysical values. Yeah, right. So it's like you can't in that sense, you can't address sexism without
getting involved, yeah, in in this other kind of intensely long historical conceptual operation
and just thinking about, like, I mean, if we care about the historicity, you know, I mean, we could talk
about, you said that, yeah, there are tons and tons of others, like strata to kind of like play this
dynamic out, but how many of them are as so deeply, um, uh, uh, hammered out, routinized, and
uh are so old, like, I mean, like, you know, I mean, if if, you know, just speak kind of the uh theologically
here, like if there's an original sin, if there's like an original violence of the human, it is the
the production of the of the feminine, right figure of the woman, right, the figure of the woman, and you
know there are plenty of other ones, but they, you know, and I won't go so far as to say they're derived
from it, but like it does it does kind of feel like the binary of all binaries. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, for
sure. Well, it also seems like, I mean, I think, I mean, he talks about it's like, you know, half of the world
this is like half of the world is subjected to this to this violence, yeah, but also just in terms
in terms of like contemporary writing on this problem, like obviously I'm not the most up to date or
whatever, but like who is doing anything interesting with this post Judith Butler, like in a way where it's not
simply advocacy in one direction or another, where like you're actually getting in the weeds with
the philosophical and the political and not just taking a side, like it just doesn't, it seems like
the discourse of feminism at least at a popular register is not even interested in in making it
this complicated. I think I mean I think Barad's doing it on the materiality front. I think someone
like Vicky Kirby is someone else who, you know, I think uh someone like Liz Grosz, yeah, Sara Ahmed, I think
does some interesting stuff with this as well. Yeah, yeah, uh, I think that uh Rosi Braidotti on uh
like the the there are there are folks out there. I mean, you're right that there's not just like this, you
know, um, yeah, there's not a singular demarcated tradition. Um, I mean let's also be clear, like
this sort of Deridian-like Nicheans, I mean, like it's already niche, right? So we're talking about like
right, right, you know, we're talking about where one sector, like a niche sector, sort of meets a much
larger sector and then now there's like a Venn diagram, so it's not like it's hard to imagine
just think about if you're interested, if you're taking a women's studies class and you're interested
in feminism, like niche is not exactly the guy that you think I got to spend some time
you know with those texts, like you really have to be coming at it from the direction that we have
come at it, which is through continental through continental philosophy and then working back
towards like the question of woman being maybe the original question, you know, um, yeah, or yeah, and or
an originary uh question, um, yeah. So yeah, so it it totally makes, you know, like whenever you whenever
you teach Niche, I mean, for me whenever I teach Niche, uh, it's like every single time I'm like I got
to start with two uh um disclaimers. One is the Nazi one, but that's easily put to bed because that's so it's
just it's just wrong and inaccurate and it's easy to point out how it's wrong and inaccurate, and the
second one is how he treats the concept of woman, and that's not easy to put to bed. That's not a
problem that you can dispense with, like the way that you can the Nazi one, and it's like look there are
pretty good reasons to not read Nietzsche uh from a certain political perspective. I get it. I don't, I
get it, and they're not wrong, you know, yeah. It's just that there's some also something else available
there. Well, I mean, I think you get obviously maybe not the that sense of the historical primacy of the
but in Butler, I mean, you certainly get most of this configuration that we've mapped out. The whole
idea she's also pulling from Nietzsche and B. She's also at odds with a good chunk of other with
feminism. I mean, like, you know, and unlike I think Irigaray and and others, like she was so meticulous in
laying out the question of women uh and and and runs, you know, the entire first like chapter or so
of Gender Trouble as like a kind of critique of the history of feminism and yeah, Kristeva, Irigaray,
like she just reads them in that yeah, then a lot of the then the response is like, you know, the
we got to stop thinking about um the essence of feminism as as thinking, you know, the content of
of women and thinking of it in terms of the performative and then you know like she gets
turned on like, you know, that that becomes like, that's a very contentious thing. It's like
this whole feminism thing you're trying to tell us that it's feminist to say that there's not
the femme like there's no feminism without femme, right? But it seems like people have doubled down
well i mean yeah clearly doubled down on identity politics rather than taking Butler's message and
running with it yeah yeah so that that's what i i wasn't saying like that like there aren't theorists
doing this kind of work it just seems like the popular discourse has gone so far in the other
direction yeah to the point where like they wouldn't even be able to to hear this and with any kind
of generosity you know i think you're right yeah like look i think it's also just a a matter of
polarization it's like you know when DeSantis is out there trying to ban this kind of stuff and like
Trump like you know when Trump is so grossly misogynistic and sort of like when a certain kind of
kind of misogyny gains a certain amount of traction it's not shocking that the response is a doubling
down on you know content first feminism right well it's kind of like i mean i honestly i'm not sure
when Roe v. Wade got overturned you know yeah it's like this is not a milieu in which i should write my
niche piece no no this is not a place for sophistication we just are throwing the largest
bold as we can at each other in a in a place of like political pressure and oppression it like the
most um the most like uh what i don't know tangible reaction is a fierce identity pot like that's what
seems to get getting the most ground like uh Black Panthers like like Malcolm X he took identity
politics to the extreme like we need to isolate and move and we're like he basically flipped
nationalism white nationalism on its head and that was effective and it was still but it wasn't
non-theoretical either like so interestingly enough smart i i mean interestingly enough because
you know i go back and forth on that because i i do on the one hand i say like yeah i understand my
identity politics is the response given the circumstances but but maybe that's wrong
right like maybe it's mistaken maybe it's like actually no go further towards the deconstruction
of identity and the thing that that you know the thing that clicks for me or resonates just a little
bit that's a little bit like that is cornell west's critique of um um tied housey coats yeah of coats
right yeah uh of Coates because I mean and it's not super well spelled out but I take
the critique to be like if you just think race is the problem you're missing capitalism like you're
missing structure like you know and and in fact all you're doing is promoting yourself as being a good race
man um and and and I mean he's harsh about it and I you know whatever but I mean I I think that one could
read that one could read his critique there as being about like we actually need to push further
not to to double down on identity as he sees Coates is doing I'm not saying that Coates is is
is doing that um yeah so I mean that's just one possible and maybe he Cornel was just had a
fucking bad day that you know that's he's been pretty routine in his responses of my understanding
yeah but like but look I I agree and this is this I mean we didn't get this recorded but we were talking
about pronouns and like you know I think like my response is to push through the deconstruction I just
I think Nate's point is just that hasn't that might be the better response that just hasn't been
the response the response has been to double down and dig trenches it doesn't well well importantly
because there's not a formula for I mean the yeah if one wants to problematize identity that's not a
method right like it doesn't tell you like okay now here's how I do it right like you have to rethink
how to respond it doesn't give you an energy each time it's not a poster either yeah you know it's not
something you can just put up it's not it's not a hashtag you know there's nothing I mean is there
a way to rally around the deconstruction of identity figure it out yeah
we're all winging it well there's that that's the irony with the woke is like I mean you know woke
didn't have the negative connotations or the sort of dogmatic connotations that it has now like you
you know I first started hearing it trafficked like the notion of woke was sort of synonymous
with a kind of thinking and a questioning and then it just seems like over time woke has solidified
into a dogmatic set of you know beliefs but you know I mean like that but that's just that that's not
to say anything like better or worse about like woke culture that's that's just to say that's just
you know the the the solidifying tendency of sort of like repetitious what happens yeah yeah yeah
but well then i i mean this is an impossible question but like the it seems like most um
Popular theorists, you know, Zizek, Butler, whoever. They're interested in almost primarily in the the
possibility or potential of radical political change, and but there's never, there can't be a formula
right? Because as we're saying, because there's not a formula inherent in the philosophical system
or political system itself, so like what I mean, it's a it's a naive question, but like where where even do
you reach exactly? Like when you're trying to map something or trying to create a movement, because
it seems like even a movement is antithetical to yes, I I think that's the response, the project
like don't create movements, right, right? But like what what else besides make fucking make
fucking podcasts and websites and just try shit and see what happens and see how it plays out?
I mean, I really think experiment is the only answer, but but that's not that can't be a movement
because then it's no longer an experiment. They can't codify around something, right? I mean, like
look, it it matters to me or I mean maybe not matters, but it says something that like Judith but like
gender trouble isn't I mean it's got the stuff on drag in the end and it's definitely sort of more
like politically applicable or something, but it's not like, you know, radical transformative politics. It is
like the whole thing is a really thoughtful sophisticated careful thinking through of a problem, and it seems
like it's as her career has moved on, like here's a certain kind of um compatibility, her popularity and
her increasing focus on yeah transformative politics and a sort of more like direct applicable whatever
and I would guess this I don't know Zizek as well, but I would guess the same is true for Zizek, but
like, you know, um, after we supposedly leave the women question behind in book two on, you know, right
after the last one explicitly on women and 76 is the greatest dangers like the majority of people need
to not do this sort of shit. The majority of people just need to like have a uh, like need to believe in
in their reality because if too many people start doing this shit then I mean and like I don't actually
think he says this, then the exception becomes the rule, right? The exception becomes the rule, but it
becomes zealous. It becomes zealous, right? Like you have to commit to being an exception, which means that
you can't make your exceptionality into a rule, right? And seems to me like what what is a crusade
other than a sort of it's a movement otherwise be yeah? Like movements are the most dangerous things, like
something that is relatively static that gets agitated and evolves from within that you know that seems to
be worthwhile, but something but when they when an idea lodges itself at the center and it becomes a
movement, now you've got kids trumping off to to the you know the holy land to fight a war. Now you have
you know bloody revolutions. Now you have like I mean it just seems like that is that's the kind of force
that becomes um tyrannical and incredibly destructive. Nietzsche is definitely the thinker of the great
exception. Yeah, exceptions have to be exceptions, they have to be exceptions, and it's like but that's why
he's interested in Jesus. That's why he's interested in Socrates. That's why he's interested in Napoleon, like
those figures that were exceptions. Now of course what did all those people do? They produced institutions.
Yeah, right, I mean all of them, right? He's totally uninterested in the institution.
interested in the exception through which the institution was generated yeah and all of
those institutions end up being totally fucked up
I just want to say one small shout out to the person like and whose death really really hit me last
week was Sinead O'Connor because I actually think that she was the most punk rock uh um like human
that has like in terms of popular music like yeah what she did I mean she I I mean there's no musician
anywhere who has done anything like what she did publicly and politically and like it it just broke
my heart. Like I totally doom scrolled uh, you know, for like several days and was crying and sad and
listening to all this stuff and and it's like I didn't I didn't appreciate her enough, right? Until
until too late because like she was punk rock.
Thank you.
From identity and detach from like hyper personalization and individualization and the idea that I get to
choose, I know, yeah, consumerist relationship to my sex, yes, to my sexual identity, like yeah yeah
right, you know, yeah, like I I've really been like, um, yeah, and what I've done is not be like I haven't
taken an oppositional stance to it, I've taken a laws i fare stance to it in that like I mean, and
I haven't been put into a position where it would be um uh weird to not say pronouns except for once
and it was during that candidate's interview and she had everyone say their pronouns, and I was like
uh the candidate asked you guys to say your pronouns? Yeah when she was doing the teaching
she did not get this job, um, but um, but my response was just I was like you know I'll respond to whatever
pronouns get my attention, so you know it's all good uh and that was and that was it, you know, it's
like you know I don't use she her, it gets my attention and then there you go, but you know like
I don't feel like one of the you know like I'm not in for the designer set like oh this will this
pronoun clashes with my you know preferred music genre, you know, that's that's the thing like yeah it's
exactly the individual capitalist consumer orientation to it. Well negotiating that at Overland will be
interesting, yeah I'll call people whatever they want yeah yeah but it will be if I remember but
I've got to remember don't get pissed if I forget because there's a lot of a lot of them to remember
It does seem like, well obviously it's a way of curating your experience and your identity and kind
of like it's like it's biopower right like increasingly segmenting and finding ways to
to accommodate yourself in the world and I don't know like a couple of the students I met were smart
but clearly progressively inclined and I wonder how that's going to play out in the classroom like if
for example you were talking about you know Nathaniel how you want to deconstruct identity either in the
class or through their writing and stuff like how do you have those conversations with students who are
going to be so invested the majority not a minority a majority of them will be invested in curating those
that's my experience is the majority in fact like the vast majority um right and like what I do do is
also I you know I pretty routinely affirm the historicity of you know like I mean there's a violence to
pronouns there's a you know like there's a subjection of of women as a concept I mean like you know like
I affirm all of the things that sort of end up being reasons for choosing pronouns and I certainly
affirm the and i'm not looking at a chance i mean i just like validate them um and i certainly you know
like affirm the um you know the the constructedness the artificiality of these sorts of things um and
then i just sort of then also point out but things that are constructed still have weight and they
like you know they have to you know like we have to ask yourself what are we constructing and doing
this and you know what is it like what we what we say we're constructing is very often not what we're
actually constructing and i point out like look there's a capitalistic machine here and um so you know
that's i mean like i go i don't i don't oppose myself to i sort of push through their inclination
to get them to a different perspective on it and that's so far like work because i mean because i i
then i haven't had any opposition then from students or other faculty because um because i i validate all
of the concerns it's just then i take you know a different turn at a certain point and the turn is not
i'm obviously he him or you know like these are you know it's